---
layout: post
title: Why do governments borrow money?
---

In many mainstream macroeconomics textbooks, the government is treated like a household or firm - it has a budget constraint when it spends. The constraint comes from the notion that taxes fund government spending, so the maximum the government can spend is the amount of taxes it collects. If the government spends more than it collects from taxes, it must borrow this excess from the public markets, because printing money instead is assumed to cause inflation or in some cases, hyperinflation. This is an inaccurate and outdated view of government spending operations. What really happens when a government borrows? Why does a government that issues its own currency even need to borrow to spend in that currency?

Firstly, let’s consider why taxes do not actually fund government spending. When you pay your taxes, the payment is made in Ringgit, which is the currency issued by the government which imposed the tax. If the government initially had not issued some currency (ringgit), there would be no money in the economy and nobody can pay taxes owed. Therefore, the government must initially run a deficit to increase the economy’s net wealth by that amount. Without this net injection of currency, you could not have owned that ringgit, and subsequently paid that income tax you owe. Hence, the government first spends money into existence for use of the public to purchase goods and services. The government does not need taxes to spend on anything it wants to. (Yes it sounds crazy but this is in fact how most sovereign currency issuing  governments - even Malaysia- function). But then why does it tax you? Taxes are a way to create incentives for productive investment and to deter the public from bad activities like smoking or carbon emissions (called sin taxes). A more advanced concept is this idea that, taxes actually create demand for the currency that the government issues. Everyone accepts and uses the currency because the government uses it to buy and sell goods and services, and will only accept tax payments with it. 
Since the government can just spend money into existence, does it do so in reality? No, instead the government issues something called bonds or government securities or Islamic government bonds. They do this not because they have to, but simply because there is a demand for these assets. Majority of the bonds issued by the government is purchased by major institutional investors from the private sector (banks, EPF, ASB, insurance). Issuing bonds provides certain benefits to the government. It allows the government to remove money from the private sector and direct it to (hopefully) productive investment or purchases. It also allows the government to provide a price for the risk free rate in its economy. Many private sector contracts rely on the risk free rate to price these contracts, which is the interest payment on government debt. Now can you see why they call it the risk free rate? There is zero chance of the government defaulting on its “debt”. Debt isn’t the right word as total government debt (should be called total government spending or issuance) is just a measure of the amount of ringgit created by the federal gov.
